.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-3.0-or-later
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Kris Kirby, KE4AHR
.\"
.TH PYAX25_22 3 "2026-03-21" "PyAX25_22 0.6.5" "PyAX25_22 Library Reference"
.SH NAME
pyax25_22 \-- Pure Python AX.25 v2.2 Layer 2 implementation for amateur packet radio
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B from pyax25_22.core.framing import AX25Frame, AX25Address
.br
.B from pyax25_22.core.connected import AX25Connection
.br
.B from pyax25_22.core.config import AX25Config
.br
.B from pyax25_22.interfaces.kiss import KISSInterface
.br
.B from pyax25_22.interfaces.agwpe import AGWPEInterface
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B PyAX25_22
is a complete, pure-Python implementation of the AX.25 Version 2.2
(July 1998) Link Layer protocol for amateur packet radio. It provides
a clean, well-tested, production-ready foundation for building packet
radio applications in Python.
.PP
The library implements all AX.25 Layer 2 features including:
.IP \(bu 4
All frame types: I (Information), S (Supervisory: RR/RNR/REJ/SREJ),
and U (Unnumbered: SABM/SABME/UA/DISC/DM/FRMR/UI/XID/TEST)
.IP \(bu 4
Modulo 8 and Modulo 128 operation
.IP \(bu 4
Up to 8 digipeaters with H-bit (has-been-repeated) handling
.IP \(bu 4
Bit stuffing/destuffing and CRC-16/CCITT-FALSE FCS calculation
.IP \(bu 4
XID parameter negotiation (modulo, window size, max frame N1, SREJ)
.IP \(bu 4
Complete connected-mode state machine per AX.25 v2.2 SDL diagrams
.IP \(bu 4
Adaptive T1 timer using SRTT (Smoothed Round-Trip Time) algorithm
.IP \(bu 4
KISS serial interface with G8BPQ multi-drop extension support
.IP \(bu 4
AGWPE (AGW Packet Engine) TCP/IP interface
.IP \(bu 4
Synchronous and asynchronous operation
.SH MODULES
.SS pyax25_22.core.framing
.PP
Frame encoding and decoding.
.TP
.B AX25Address(callsign, ssid=0, c_bit=False, h_bit=False)
Represents one AX.25 address field entry. The callsign is 1\-6 uppercase
letters. The SSID is 0\-15. The c_bit is the Command/Response bit. The
h_bit is the Has-Been-Repeated bit (used in digipeater fields).
.TP
.B AX25Frame(destination, source, digipeaters=[], control=0, pid=None, info=b"", config=DEFAULT_CONFIG_MOD8)
Represents a complete AX.25 frame. Call
.B encode()
to get the raw bytes (with flags and FCS). Call
.B AX25Frame.decode(raw_bytes)
to parse a raw frame.
.TP
.B fcs_calc(data)
Calculate the CRC-16/CCITT-FALSE FCS over a block of bytes. Returns a
16-bit integer.
.TP
.B verify_fcs(data, received_fcs)
Verify a received FCS value against computed FCS. Returns True if valid.
.SS pyax25_22.core.config
.PP
Protocol configuration with validated parameters.
.TP
.B AX25Config(modulo=8, max_frame=256, window_size=7, t1_timeout=10.0, t3_timeout=300.0, retry_count=10, tx_delay=0.3, tx_tail=0.05, persistence=63, slot_time=0.1)
Immutable (frozen) configuration object. All parameters are validated on
creation. Raises ConfigurationError for out-of-range values.
.RS 4
.TP
.B modulo
Sequence number modulo: 8 (normal) or 128 (extended).
.TP
.B max_frame
Maximum I-frame information field size in bytes (N1). Range: 1\-4096.
.TP
.B window_size
Maximum outstanding I-frames (k). Range: 1\-7 (mod 8) or 1\-127 (mod 128).
.TP
.B t1_timeout
Acknowledgment timer T1 in seconds. Range: 0.0\-300.0.
.TP
.B t3_timeout
Idle channel probe timer T3 in seconds. Range: 10.0\-3600.0.
.TP
.B retry_count
Maximum retransmission attempts (N2). Range: 0\-255.
.RE
.PP
Pre-defined configuration objects:
.RS 4
.TP
.B DEFAULT_CONFIG_MOD8
Standard modulo-8 operation, 7-frame window, 10-second T1.
.TP
.B DEFAULT_CONFIG_MOD128
Extended modulo-128 operation, 63-frame window, 15-second T1.
.TP
.B CONFIG_APRS
Optimized for APRS monitoring (4-frame window, 5-second T1).
.RE
.SS pyax25_22.core.statemachine
.PP
AX.25 connected-mode state machine per SDL diagrams.
.TP
.B AX25State
Enum with states: DISCONNECTED, AWAITING_CONNECTION, AWAITING_RELEASE,
CONNECTED, TIMER_RECOVERY, AWAITING_XID.
.TP
.B AX25StateMachine(config, layer3_initiated=True)
Implements state transitions. Call
.B transition(event)
to drive state changes. Valid events include: connect_request,
SABM_received, SABME_received, UA_received, DM_received, FRMR_received,
DISC_received, disconnect_request, T1_timeout, T3_timeout, ack_received,
RR_received, RNR_received, REJ_received, SREJ_received, XID_received.
.SS pyax25_22.core.connected
.PP
Connected-mode AX.25 session management.
.TP
.B AX25Connection(local_addr, remote_addr, config=None, initiate=False, transport=None)
Manages a single connected AX.25 link. Integrates state machine, flow
control, and timers.
.RS 4
.TP
.B connect()
Initiate connection: sends SABM/SABME and waits for UA.
.TP
.B disconnect()
Initiate disconnection: sends DISC and waits for UA.
.TP
.B send_data(data)
Queue I-frame data for transmission.
.TP
.B receive_data()
Return next received I-frame payload.
.TP
.B process_frame(frame)
Process an incoming AX.25 frame (drives state machine).
.RE
.SS pyax25_22.core.flow_control
.PP
Sliding window flow control manager.
.TP
.B AX25FlowControl(state_machine, config)
Manages V(S), V(R), V(A) sequence variables and supervisory frame
generation.
.RS 4
.TP
.B can_send_i_frame()
Returns True if the transmit window has space.
.TP
.B enqueue_i_frame(seq_num)
Record an outstanding I-frame sequence number.
.TP
.B acknowledge_up_to(nr)
Acknowledge all frames up to and including N(R)-1.
.TP
.B window_available
Property: number of I-frame slots remaining in the window.
.RE
.SS pyax25_22.core.timers
.PP
AX.25 timer management with adaptive T1.
.TP
.B AX25Timers(config, on_t1_expire=None, on_t3_expire=None)
Manages T1 (acknowledgment) and T3 (idle probe) timers. T1 adapts
using the SRTT (Smoothed Round-Trip Time) Jacobson/Karels algorithm.
.RS 4
.TP
.B start_t1_sync()
Start T1 timer (synchronous/threaded mode).
.TP
.B stop_t1_sync()
Stop T1 timer.
.TP
.B start_t3_sync()
Start T3 idle probe timer.
.TP
.B update_srtt(rtt)
Update the smoothed RTT estimate with a new round-trip time sample.
.RE
.SS pyax25_22.core.negotiation
.PP
XID parameter negotiation.
.TP
.B build_xid_frame(config)
Build the XID information field bytes (TLV format) for the given config.
.TP
.B parse_xid_frame(info)
Parse XID information field bytes. Returns a dict of parameter ID -> value.
.TP
.B negotiate_config(local_config, remote_params)
Negotiate a final configuration by taking the minimum of offered values.
Returns an AX25Config.
.SS pyax25_22.core.exceptions
.PP
Exception hierarchy (all inherit from
.B AX25Error
):
.RS 4
.TP
.B AX25Error
Base exception for all library errors.
.TP
.B FrameError
Frame parsing or encoding failure.
.TP
.B InvalidAddressError
Malformed callsign or SSID.
.TP
.B FCSError
CRC verification failure.
.TP
.B BitStuffingError
Bit stuffing/destuffing violation.
.TP
.B ConnectionStateError
Operation in invalid state.
.TP
.B TimeoutError
Timer expiration.
.TP
.B ProtocolViolationError
AX.25 protocol violation (e.g., FRMR condition).
.TP
.B NegotiationError
XID parameter negotiation failure.
.TP
.B KISSError
KISS protocol or serial I/O error.
.TP
.B AGWPEError
AGWPE TCP/IP connection or protocol error.
.TP
.B ConfigurationError
Invalid configuration parameters.
.RE
.SS pyax25_22.interfaces.transport
.PP
Abstract base class for all transport interfaces.
.TP
.B TransportInterface
Abstract class with methods: connect(), disconnect(), send_frame(frame),
receive(timeout=None), register_callback(event, callback).
All transport implementations inherit from this class.
.SS pyax25_22.interfaces.kiss
.PP
KISS serial interface with G8BPQ multi-drop support.
.TP
.B KISSInterface(port, baudrate=9600, tnc_address=0, timeout=1.0)
Connects to a TNC via serial KISS protocol. Supports multi-drop
addressing (G8BPQ extension) where the TNC address is encoded in the
high nibble (bits 4\-7) of the command byte.
.RS 4
.TP
.B connect()
Open the serial port and start the background reader thread.
.TP
.B disconnect()
Stop the reader thread and close the serial port.
.TP
.B send_frame(frame, cmd=CMD_DATA)
Encode an AX25Frame as a KISS frame and write it to the serial port.
.TP
.B receive(timeout=None)
Block until a frame is available. Returns (tnc_addr, port, AX25Frame).
Raises KISSError on timeout.
.TP
.B register_callback(cmd, callback)
Register a function to call when a specific KISS command is received.
The callback signature is: callback(tnc_addr, port, frame).
.RE
.PP
KISS Constants:
.RS 4
.TP
.B FEND = 0xC0
Frame end delimiter.
.TP
.B FESC = 0xDB
Frame escape character.
.TP
.B TFEND = 0xDC
Escaped FEND within data.
.TP
.B TFESC = 0xDD
Escaped FESC within data.
.TP
.B CMD_DATA = 0x00
Send/receive data frame.
.TP
.B CMD_TXDELAY = 0x01
Set transmitter keyup delay.
.TP
.B CMD_PERSISTENCE = 0x02
Set P-persistence value.
.TP
.B CMD_SLOTTIME = 0x03
Set slot time.
.TP
.B CMD_TXTAIL = 0x04
Set transmitter tail delay.
.TP
.B CMD_FULLDUPLEX = 0x05
Enable or disable full duplex.
.TP
.B CMD_POLL = 0x0E
Poll command (G8BPQ multi-drop).
.TP
.B CMD_EXIT_KISS = 0xFF
Exit KISS mode.
.RE
.SS pyax25_22.interfaces.agwpe
.PP
AGWPE (AGW Packet Engine) TCP/IP API client.
.TP
.B AGWPEInterface(host='127.0.0.1', port=8000, timeout=5.0)
Connects to an AGWPE server over TCP. The default port is 8000.
.RS 4
.TP
.B connect()
Open TCP connection and start background reader thread.
.TP
.B disconnect()
Stop reader thread and close the TCP socket.
.TP
.B register_callsign(callsign)
Register a callsign with the AGWPE server ('X' command).
.TP
.B enable_monitoring()
Enable monitoring of all received frames ('m' command).
.TP
.B disable_monitoring()
Disable frame monitoring ('m' command toggle).
.TP
.B query_version()
Request AGWPE server version information ('R' command).
.TP
.B query_port_capabilities(port=0)
Request radio port capabilities ('g' command).
.TP
.B query_outstanding_frames(port=0, callsign='')
Query count of outstanding (queued) frames ('y' command).
.TP
.B enable_raw_frames()
Enable reception of raw AX.25 frames ('k' command).
.TP
.B send_frame(port, data_kind, call_from, call_to, data=b'')
Send a raw AGWPE frame with the given header fields.
.TP
.B receive(timeout=None)
Return next received frame as (port, data_kind, call_from, call_to, data).
Raises AGWPEError on timeout.
.TP
.B register_callback(data_kind, callback)
Register a function to call when a specific DataKind is received.
Callback signature: callback(port, call_from, call_to, data).
.RE
.PP
AGWPE DataKind values:
.RS 4
.TP
.B 'X'
Callsign registration reply.
.TP
.B 'G'
Port capabilities information.
.TP
.B 'R'
Version information.
.TP
.B 'm'
Monitored frame data.
.TP
.B 'k'
Raw AX.25 frame.
.TP
.B 'U'
Unproto (UI frame) monitor data.
.TP
.B 'D'
Data from connected station.
.TP
.B 'd'
Disconnect notification.
.TP
.B 'c'
New connection established.
.TP
.B 'H'
Heard stations list.
.TP
.B 'Y'
Outstanding frames count.
.RE
.SS pyax25_22.utils.logging
.PP
Structured logging configuration.
.TP
.B get_logger(name)
Return a configured logger for the given module name. Uses the
PYAX25_LOG_LEVEL environment variable to set the log level (default INFO).
Set PYAX25_LOG_FILE to write logs to a file instead of stderr.
.TP
.B enable_debug_logging()
Enable DEBUG-level logging for all pyax25_22 modules.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PYAX25_LOG_LEVEL
Set the logging level. Values: DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR, CRITICAL.
Default is INFO.
.TP
.B PYAX25_LOG_FILE
Path to a log file. If not set, logs go to stderr.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Create and encode an AX.25 UI frame
.PP
.nf
from pyax25_22.core.framing import AX25Frame, AX25Address

dest = AX25Address("APRS", ssid=0)
src  = AX25Address("KE4AHR", ssid=1)
frame = AX25Frame(
    destination=dest,
    source=src,
    control=0x03,   # UI frame
    pid=0xF0,       # No-layer-3
    info=b">Hello from PyAX25_22!",
)
raw = frame.encode()
print(raw.hex())
.fi
.SS Connect to a TNC via KISS and monitor frames
.PP
.nf
from pyax25_22.interfaces.kiss import KISSInterface

kiss = KISSInterface("/dev/ttyUSB0", baudrate=9600)
kiss.connect()

while True:
    tnc_addr, port, frame = kiss.receive(timeout=30.0)
    print(f"{frame.source.callsign} > {frame.destination.callsign}")
.fi
.SS Connect to AGWPE and enable monitoring
.PP
.nf
from pyax25_22.interfaces.agwpe import AGWPEInterface

agwpe = AGWPEInterface(host="127.0.0.1", port=8000)
agwpe.connect()
agwpe.register_callsign("KE4AHR")
agwpe.enable_monitoring()

while True:
    port, kind, frm, to, data = agwpe.receive(timeout=30.0)
    print(f"{frm} > {to}: {data}")
.fi
.SS Establish a connected AX.25 session
.PP
.nf
from pyax25_22.core.framing import AX25Address
from pyax25_22.core.connected import AX25Connection
from pyax25_22.core.config import DEFAULT_CONFIG_MOD8

local  = AX25Address("KE4AHR", ssid=1)
remote = AX25Address("W1AW",   ssid=0)

conn = AX25Connection(local, remote, config=DEFAULT_CONFIG_MOD8,
                      initiate=True)
conn.connect()
conn.send_data(b"Hello via AX.25 connected mode!")
data = conn.receive_data()
conn.disconnect()
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/core/framing.py
AX.25 frame encoding, decoding, bit stuffing, FCS.
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/core/statemachine.py
AX.25 state machine (6 states per SDL diagrams).
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/core/connected.py
Connected-mode session (AX25Connection class).
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/core/flow_control.py
Sliding window flow control (RR/RNR/REJ/SREJ).
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/core/timers.py
T1 adaptive timer (SRTT) and T3 idle probe timer.
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/core/negotiation.py
XID parameter negotiation (TLV encoding/decoding).
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/core/config.py
Protocol configuration (AX25Config dataclass).
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/core/exceptions.py
Complete exception hierarchy.
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/interfaces/kiss.py
KISS serial interface with multi-drop support.
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/interfaces/agwpe.py
AGWPE TCP/IP client interface.
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/interfaces/transport.py
Abstract transport base class.
.TP
.I src/pyax25_22/utils/logging.py
Structured logging configuration.
.TP
.I docs/smack_spec.md
SMACK (Stuttgart Modified Amateurradio-CRC-KISS) protocol specification.
.TP
.I docs/kiss_spec.md
KISS protocol specification.
.TP
.I docs/agwpe_spec.md
AGWPE protocol specification.
.SH ERRORS
All errors raise exceptions that inherit from
.B pyax25_22.core.exceptions.AX25Error.
.PP
Frame parsing errors raise
.B FrameError
or a subclass (InvalidAddressError, FCSError, BitStuffingError).
.PP
State machine violations raise
.B ConnectionStateError.
.PP
Transport failures raise
.B KISSError
or
.B AGWPEError.
.PP
Configuration errors raise
.B ConfigurationError.
.SH STANDARDS
.TP
AX.25 Link Access Protocol for Amateur Packet Radio, Version 2.2, July 1998.
.TP
KISS TNC: A Simple Host-to-TNC Communications Protocol, Mike Chepponis K3MC and Phil Karn KA9Q, 1986.
.TP
SMACK -- Stuttgart Modified Amateurradio-CRC-KISS, Jan Schiefer DL5UE and Dieter Deyke DK5SG, 1991.
.TP
AGWPE TCP/IP Socket Interface, George Rossopoulos SV2AGW, 2000.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR python3 (1),
.BR pyserial (3)
.PP
Project homepage: https://github.com/ke4ahr/PyAX25_22
.PP
BPQ32 reference implementation: https://github.com/g8bpq/BPQ32
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/ke4ahr/PyAX25_22/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Kris Kirby, KE4AHR <ke4ahr@gmail.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2026 Kris Kirby, KE4AHR.
.PP
License: GNU General Public License v3.0 or later (GPL-3.0-or-later).
.PP
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
